A woman has paid a heartbreaking tribute to her boyfriend, who drowned while proposing marriage to her in Tanzania. Kenesha Antoine posted a video on Facebook of her boyfriend, Steven Weber, swimming up to the window of their underwater room at the Manta Resort on Pemba Island, off Tanzania. “I can’t hold my breath long enough to tell you everything I love about you. But everything I love about you I love more every day!” the note reads. In the video, the Louisiana man flips the page to show the message “Will you marry me?” before pulling out an engagement ring box. Antoine posted on Facebook that Weber “never emerged from those depths”. “You never got to hear my answer, ‘Yes! Yes! A million times, yes’. We never got to embrace and celebrate the beginning of the rest of our lives together, as the best day of our lives turned into the worst, in the cruelest (sic) twist of fate imaginable. “I will try to take solace in the fact that we enjoyed the most amazing bucket list experiences these past few days, and that we both were so happy and absolutely giddy with excitement in our final moments together.” “Wherever in the universe Steven’s spirit now resides … he’s probably entertaining someone with a story about how he royally screwed up that proposal and died while being extra.” The Manta Resort confirmed in a statement that a guest had died. The chief executive of the resort, Matthew Saus, said: “A male guest tragically drowned while free diving alone outside the underwater room. The accident is currently under investigation by the local Zanzibar police authority. “Our sincerest condolences, thoughts and prayers are with his girlfriend, families and friends impacted by this tragic accident.” US state department reportedly told CNN that a US tourist had died in Tanzania, but gave no further details.  “We offer our sincerest condolences to the family on their loss. We stand ready to provide all appropriate consular assistance,” the state department was quoted as saying.