Tanzania’s president John Magufuli is presiding over an escalating campaign of repression that has targeted journalists, human rights defenders and political opponents ahead of his plans to run for re-election next year, two reports claim. Magufuli – nicknamed “the Bulldozer” – is accused in two independent reports, by the human rights organisations Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch, of presiding over rising levels of abuses against activists and opponents since his election in 2015. The two reports paint a chilling picture of Tanzanian rights under assault, beginning with Magufuli’s announcement in July 2016 of a blanket ban on political activities until 2020, which critics say has been used to target opposition parties and justify politically motivated trials. Amnesty cites amendments made to the country’s Political Parties Act at the beginning of this year that introduced wide-ranging restrictions on the rights to freedom of association and peaceful assembly, moves that have been accompanied by violence. In 2017, unidentified assailants shot an opposition member of parliament, Tundu Lissu, and in 2018, unidentified assailants killed two officials, Daniel John and Godfrey Luena, of the main opposition party, Chadema. Although police said they are investigating these killings, no arrests have yet been made. In tandem with moves restricting political activity, Tanzania’s media has seen increasing censorship and scrutiny under a new Media Services Act with at least six media outlets suspended for publishing stories about corruption and human rights violations. Beyond suspension and threats, journalists in Tanzania have also faced arbitrary arrests and prosecutions. In one extreme case, journalist Azory Gwanda disappeared under mysterious circumstances in November 2017. In one of the most high-profile cases earlier this year, police arrested investigative reporter Erick Kabendera. Public statements suggested he had been questioned about the validity of his Tanzanian nationality and later interrogated for alleged sedition and publication of false information in an Economist article he wrote. “As President Magufuli marks four years in office next month, he must carefully reflect on his government’s record of ruthlessly disemboweling the country’s human rights framework,” said Roland Ebole, Amnesty International’s Tanzania researcher. “His government must repeal all oppressive laws being used to clamp down on dissent, and urgently end human rights violations and abuses.” Oryem Nyeko, Africa researcher at Human Rights Watch, added: “Tanzania should show true commitment to protecting and fulfilling the rights to freedom of expression and association. The authorities need to put a stop to harassment, intimidation and arbitrary arrests of activists, journalists and opposition members.” The authorities need to put a stop to harassment, intimidation and arbitrary arrests of activists Both Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch found that Tanzanian authorities had undermined the rights to freedom of expression and media freedom by enforcing repressive new and existing laws and regulations governing the media, NGOs and political parties. The reports were researched and documented separately, but their findings were similar. Just days after taking office in late 2015, Magufuli cancelled the symbolic independence day fete and used funds for the event to widen a part of a highway notorious for gridlocks in Dar es Salaam. He also fired a number of senior government figures in an anti-corruption crusade. The moves were initially well received. Fast forward to 2019 and opinion about him and his regime is more divided. Magufuli, who is leader of the ruling Party of the Revolution (Chama Cha Mapinduzi, or CCM) earned his nickname while public works minister, when he removed thousands of ghost workers from the payroll and purged incompetent civil servants. Since becoming president he has acquired a reputation for authoritarian and peremptory announcements which have caused friction with international organisations, including the World Health Organization, which was refused data over a suspected case of the deadly ebola virus earlier this year. Earlier this month he publicly backed an official who sparked outrage and violated the country’s rules by beating more than a dozen students with a stick. Magufuli urged parents and school teachers to do the same in order to build a disciplined nation. 